---
layout: talk
title: "Know Your Past to Predict Your Future"
language: English
venue: Code BEAM Stockholm 2022
snip: >
  What do you do when you stumble upon failures in production that you can't
  easily debug? Well, you time-travel to the past, obviously! In this talk we look at time-travelling debuggers and techniques to have them always enabled in production.
thumbnail: /media/talks/2022-codebeam/thumbnail.png
category: storybook
---

<div class="rl-slide-show" data-start="1" data-end="80" data-format="/media/talks/2022-codebeam/slide%3d.png"></div>

> <strong class="heading">On the sad state of affairs</strong>
> Please note that this particular talk relies heavily on animations, and
> they are not displayed properly in the slideshow above. This will be
> fixed soon-ish.
{: .warning }

- - - 

You're merrily walking by your production environment one day when you
notice that... something feels odd. You can't quite put your finger on
it, though. It's not like there are things *literally* on fire. It's
not like you have any unique identifier to chase. Something just *feels*
wrong. You know it's probably wrong, even. You just don't quite know
what. And why.

How do you go about debugging these kind of failures? In this talk we
look at what the experience of debugging could look like when using
different forms of time-travelling debuggers, and then dive into the
technical concepts that make this possible. Want to have time-travelling
always enabled in production? Recording years of data, even? That is
possible, and we look into what kind of trade-offs you'll be looking
to make here.


### Related material

- [Debugging Reinvented: asking and answering why and why not questions about program behavior](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1368088.1368130)
  --- *Amy J. Ko, and Brad A. Myers (2008)*<br>
  Amy's work on the Whyline debugger is a magical tale of what debugging
  tools could look like if you looked at them through a lens of augmentation,
  rather than a one-stop-solution-to-all-your-problems.
- [Reverb: speculative debugging for web applications](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3357223.3362733)
  --- *Ravi Netravali, and James Mickens (2019)*<br>
  Record-and-replay debugging generally don't take to changing the source code
  very well; Ravi and James' work shows that tracing at higher levels helps
  significantly with how much fun stuff you can actually do with traces, due
  to improved semantic restrictions!
- [The rr debugger](https://rr-project.org/)
  --- *Robert O'Callahan, Chris Jones, Nathan Froyd, Kyle Huey, Albert Noll, and Nimrod Partush (2017)*<br>
  Originally designed for debugging hard-to-reproduce failures in Firefox
  through record-and-replay, rr is a neat example of practical engineering
  for general-purpose time-travelling debuggers. The limitations of tracing
  at a very low level are certainly offset by its broad applicability.
- [Crochet's tracing support](https://robotlolita.me/diary/2022/02/crochet-0.14/#trace-debugging-and-representations)
  --- *Quil (2022)*<br>
  A lot of the ideas in this talk are just things I've been playing around
  with in Crochet before I had the chance to apply them to a bigger production
  environment. Crochet's focuses primarily on domain-specific debuggers.
- [Erlang's tracing support](https://www.erlang.org/doc/apps/observer/ttb_ug.html)
  The BEAM has a very extensive suite of trace-based debugging tools as
  libraries, which one can use as a basis for building their own debugging
  tools, and they were a major influence on Crochet's trace-debugging design
  (and, consequently, on this talk as well).
{: .rl-reading-list }